Electronic Casual Vacancy Algorithm

Assumptions & Background: 

	One previously successful candidate has been chosen as the
	"Vacating" candidate.

	(See also Hare-Clarke description).

	The candidates 'standing' in the Casual Vacancy Count Back have been determined.

Algorithm:

SETUP

1) Conduct a Hare-Clark scrutiny up until the stage when the vacating
   candidate is elected.

2) Eliminate from all future consideration, any candidates who are not
   standing, other than the vacating candidate.

3) Calculate the starting total as follows.  

If the vacating member was elected by achieving or passing quota

		Set the starting total to Quota

If the vacating member was elected with less than Quota

		Set the starting total to the votes attained at count when elected

4) If  the vacating member passed quota when elected, separate the ballots received by the candidate on the final count,
   and separate them into two piles:

	Ballots which have a standing candidate with a higher
	preference than the preference given to the vacating
	candidate.
	NOTE: non-exhausted ballots.

	Other ballots.
	NOTE: exhausted ballots.

5) Calculate NCP x TV, where NCP is the number of ballots in the
   exhausted pile, and TV is the transfer value of one of the votes.
   NOTE: All votes in both piles currently have the same transfer value.

6) Calculate N, the vote total of the vacating candidate prior to the
   count on which they reached quota.

7) If NCP x TV is greater or equal to the quota of the hare-clarke
   scrutiny minus N:

 	Set the vote value of the exhausted ballots to (quota - n)/ncp.
	Set the vote value of the non-exhausted ballots to zero.

8) Otherwise:

	Set the vote value of the non-exhausted ballots to:
		(quota - N - (NCP x TV)) / CP
	Where CP is the number of non-exhausted ballots.
	NOTE: Do not alter the vote value of the exhausted ballots.

Note: Steps 4 to 8 ensure that the votes received by the vacating member at the count when elected are given a transfer value to ensure that the total number of votes to be distributed from the vacating member equals the Quota 

9) Sort the vacating candidate's piles from every count but the final
   one, and the pile of non-exhausted ballots, into decreasing
   vote-value order.

10) Restart the Hare-Clark count at STEP 1.

11) Set the totals for every candidate for every count to zero.

12) Set the vacating candidate's total for count zero to the starting
    total.

13) Set the vacating candidate's status to BEING EXCLUDED.

14) For every Group of piles of same vote value, in decreasing vote value order:
    NOTE: We now have ONE pile per distinct vote value

	Take this Group and the vacating candidate to Hare-Clark
	PARTIAL EXCLUSION STEP 36b through 42 inclusive, with quota
	set to infinity.

	If this is not the last Group, increment the count by one.

	NOTE: PARTIAL EXCLUSION without incrementing the count, and
	without marking any candidate PENDING (since quota is
	infinite).

15) While no one has an absolute majority:

	Set the quota to the absolute majority, and the number of
	vacancies to one, and go to STEP 12 of Hare-Clark.  Return
	here instead of returning to Hare-Clark STEP 8.

	NOTE: This means selection of the "worst" candidate proceeds
	in exactly the same way, including any tiebreaks required.

16) Declare the candidate with absolute majority successful.

NOTE: The absolute majority is calculated as follows:
	a) Sum the totals for every  continuing candidate.

	   NOTE: The totals for excluded and the vacating candidate
	   are zero, so it is irrelevent whether they are counted or
	   not.

	b) Divide this number by two (round down) and add one.




Modified by Carol 8 October 2001
